



Individual Submission                                         A. H. Bond
Internet-Draft                                 San José State University
Intended status: Experimental                             23 August 2026
Expires: 24 February 2027


Receiver-Relative Measurement of False-Idle CCA Outcomes in IEEE 802.11
                     draft-bond-cca-measurement-00

Abstract

   IEEE 802.11 Clear Channel Assessment (CCA) is performed at the
   transmitter, but the harm it is meant to prevent -- a collision --
   occurs at the receiver.  Whenever the transmitter's view of the
   medium differs from the receiver's, CCA can report idle while the
   receiver is being interfered with by a station the transmitter cannot
   sense: the classical hidden-node case.

   This document defines an EXPERIMENTAL methodology for measuring, at
   the receiver, the rate at which transmissions attempted after an idle
   CCA indication are lost with witnessed interferer overlap (the
   interferer-overlap loss rate), and for comparing that rate between
   basic access and RTS/CTS access under randomized, interleaved
   assignment.  It also defines a CCA Measurement Report information
   model for expressing such measurements with their witness,
   statistical method, context, and provenance.  It specifies
   measurement and reporting only.  Normative changes to IEEE 802.11 PHY
   or MAC behavior are out of scope and are the remit of IEEE 802.11;
   this document is intended to inform such work with a common
   measurement vocabulary.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 24 February 2027.




Bond                    Expires 24 February 2027                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Receiver-Relative CCA Measurement        August 2026


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Scope and Non-Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.  Conventions and Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Receiver-Relative Framing (Informative) . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.  Measurement Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.1.  Separation of Concerns  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.2.  Consumer Footprint  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.3.  Outcome Taxonomy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.4.  Witness Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.5.  Rate Definition and Attribution . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.6.  Registration-First Discipline . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.  Comparative Procedure: Basic Access versus RTS/CTS  . . . . .   9
     5.1.  Treatment Assignment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.2.  Held-Constant Conditions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.3.  Interferer Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.4.  Statistics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   6.  Active False-Alarm Procedure (Optional) . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   7.  CCA Measurement Report Information Model  . . . . . . . . . .  10
     7.1.  Report Structure  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     7.2.  Example (Illustrative Only) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   8.  Implementation Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   9.  Relationship to IEEE 802.11 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   10. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   11. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   12. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     12.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     12.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   Appendix A.  Candidate Future Measurement Profiles
           (Informative) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   Appendix B.  Conducted Hidden-Node Experiment Sketch
           (Informative) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   Appendix C.  Changes from the Precursor Draft . . . . . . . . . .  18



Bond                    Expires 24 February 2027                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Receiver-Relative CCA Measurement        August 2026


   Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19

1.  Introduction

   Carrier-sense multiple access with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA), as
   specified for IEEE 802.11 [IEEE802.11], makes each transmission
   conditional on an assessment that the medium is available.  That
   assessment -- Clear Channel Assessment (CCA) -- is performed at the
   _transmitter_. The event it is meant to prevent, a collision, occurs
   at the _receiver_. Whenever the transmitter's local view of the
   medium differs from the receiver's, the assessment can be wrong in
   the dangerous direction: the transmitter senses the medium idle and
   transmits, and the receiver, in range of a station the transmitter
   cannot hear, experiences interference.  This is the classical hidden-
   node problem [MACA] [MACAW].

   How often this actually happens for a given link -- the rate at which
   "idle" at the transmitter coincides with witnessed interference at
   the receiver -- is not routinely measured in deployed networks.  RTS/
   CTS access [MACA] [MACAW] exists to reduce it, and its cost/benefit
   has been analyzed extensively since [BIANCHI], but the residual rate
   for a specific link, receiver, and traffic class is generally
   unmeasured, and there is no common form in which to express such a
   measurement.

   This document defines:

   1.  terminology that separates the access method, the CCA
       observation, the consumer outcome, and the outcome witness
       (Section 2);

   2.  a receiver-relative measurement methodology for the interferer-
       overlap loss rate of transmissions attempted after an idle CCA
       indication (Section 4);

   3.  a randomized comparative procedure for grading basic access
       against RTS/CTS access on the same link (Section 5);

   4.  an OPTIONAL active procedure for the counterfactual false-alarm
       (exposed-node) direction (Section 6);

   5.  a CCA Measurement Report information model for expressing results
       (Section 7).

   The methodology is motivated by a broader program on receiver-
   relative (consumer-relative) reliability measurement [OT] [VACUITY];
   the motivation is summarized in Section 3 and is not normative.



Bond                    Expires 24 February 2027                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Receiver-Relative CCA Measurement        August 2026


1.1.  Scope and Non-Goals

   This document's normative scope is the measurement of CCA outcomes
   for unicast data transmissions and the comparison of basic access
   with RTS/CTS access, together with the report format for those
   measurements.

   This document does NOT specify, and explicitly defers to IEEE 802.11:

   *  any change to CCA, NAV, RTS/CTS, rate selection, spatial reuse, or
      any other PHY or MAC behavior;

   *  any new frame format transmitted over the air as part of the MAC.

   Other channel-access decisions to which a receiver-relative
   measurement discipline might later be applied (NAV expiry, rate
   selection, spatial reuse, roaming triggers) are NOT covered by the
   normative sections of this document; Appendix A records them as
   candidate future measurement profiles and the reasons they are harder
   than CCA.  The relationship to IEEE 802.11 is stated in Section 9.

   The CCA Measurement Report defined here is a management/telemetry
   information model (Section 7); this document does not select a wire
   encoding or transport.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   The requirement keywords in this document constrain conformance to
   the measurement methodology (Section 4, Section 5, Section 6) and to
   the report model (Section 7), NOT the behavior of any 802.11 station.

   Access Method:  The channel-access procedure in use for an
      opportunity: basic (data transmission following CCA and backoff)
      or rts-cts (the RTS/CTS exchange preceding the data transmission).
      Both access methods use CCA; "basic access" is therefore the
      correct name for what earlier drafts called "CCA-alone".

   CCA Observation:  The transmitter's CCA indication (idle or busy) for
      the primary channel at the moment a transmission opportunity
      arises, together with the CCA configuration under which it was
      made (energy-detect and preamble-detect thresholds, channel, and
      bandwidth).



Bond                    Expires 24 February 2027                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Receiver-Relative CCA Measurement        August 2026


   Transmission Opportunity (atomic unit):  A single PPDU transmission
      attempt initiated after an idle CCA observation.  Each retry
      attempt is a distinct opportunity, tagged with its retry number.
      For an A-MPDU, the PPDU is the opportunity and per-MPDU outcomes
      are recorded within it (Section 4.3).

   Consumer:  The party whose successful reception the CCA indication is
      meant to protect: the intended receiver of the PPDU and,
      transitively, the traffic class (TID) it carries.

   Consumer Footprint:  The set of receivers and/or TIDs over which a
      measurement is graded.  Results are reported per footprint element
      with a declared aggregation rule (Section 7).

   Consumer Outcome:  The receiver-side result of one opportunity:
      complete-success, partial-success (a proper subset of an A-MPDU's
      MPDUs delivered, per Block Ack), decode-failure, or indeterminate
      (Section 4.3).

   Outcome Witness:  The evidence channel used to establish the consumer
      outcome and the presence or absence of interferer overlap,
      independent of the transmitter's own sensing: receiver-trace (the
      receiver's own per-MPDU decode log), ack-evidence (ACK or Block
      Ack received at the transmitter), iq-capture (a synchronized IQ
      recording at or adjacent to the receiver), or compound (a declared
      combination).  Witness requirements are given in Section 4.4.

   Interferer-Overlap Loss:  An opportunity in which the CCA observation
      was idle, the transmission was attempted, the consumer outcome was
      decode-failure (or partial-success, counted per Section 4.3), AND
      the witness confirms interfering energy or a decodable interfering
      waveform overlapping the PPDU at the receiver.  Overlap is an
      observed coincidence; it is causal attribution only under a
      controlled design that identifies causation (Section 4.5).

   Interferer-Overlap Loss Rate (IOLR):  N(interferer-overlap losses) /
      N(opportunities with idle CCA and an attempted transmission), for
      a declared footprint element and interval.

   False-Idle Outcome:  An interferer-overlap loss under an experimental
      design that identifies the overlap as causal (Section 4.5).  The
      IOLR of such a design MAY be described as a false-idle rate;
      otherwise the neutral term IOLR MUST be used.

   CCA Measurement Report (CMR):  The structured object defined in
      Section 7 expressing one measurement: profile, subject, access
      method, footprint, witness, counts, rate estimates with their
      statistical method, context, and provenance.



Bond                    Expires 24 February 2027                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Receiver-Relative CCA Measurement        August 2026


   Registration-First Measurement:  A measurement discipline in which
      the analysis plan, thresholds, and manipulation checks are
      committed immutably before the measurement is run, and every
      outcome -- including negative results -- is retained
      (Section 4.6).

3.  Receiver-Relative Framing (Informative)

   In the vocabulary of [OT], the CCA indication is an assertion made by
   one party (the transmitter) on which a different party (the receiver,
   and the flow it carries) depends.  Three properties make such an
   assertion meaningful to its consumer: it is _consumer-relative_
   (graded against the receiver's condition, not the transmitter's
   sensing), _witnessed_ (graded against evidence independent of the
   asserting party), and _calibrated_ (carrying a measured error rate
   with known provenance rather than an assumed one).  The hidden-node
   case is precisely the gap between transmitter-relative sensing and
   receiver-relative truth; the exposed-node case is the availability
   analogue.  This document instantiates that framing for exactly one
   assertion -- CCA idle -- and otherwise leaves the general program to
   [OT] and [VACUITY].

4.  Measurement Model

4.1.  Separation of Concerns

   An experiment conformant with this document records, for every
   transmission opportunity, four separate facts:

   1.  the *access method* in effect (basic or rts-cts);

   2.  the *CCA observation* (idle or busy) and its configuration;

   3.  the *consumer outcome* (Section 4.3);

   4.  the *outcome witness* evidence used, and what it shows about
       interferer overlap.

   Conflating these was the central defect of draft -00: an RTS/CTS
   exchange is part of the access _treatment_ (it changes other
   stations' behavior via the NAV), not an independent witness of the
   data transmission's outcome; a received ACK or Block Ack evidences
   reception, but a _missing_ ACK does not distinguish collision,
   fading, rate mismatch, receiver failure, ACK loss, or implementation
   error; and an IQ capture establishes overlapping energy, not
   causation.





Bond                    Expires 24 February 2027                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Receiver-Relative CCA Measurement        August 2026


4.2.  Consumer Footprint

   The experiment MUST declare the consumer footprint.  Results MUST be
   reported per footprint element together with the aggregation rule and
   weighting used for any aggregate (Section 7); a single device-global
   number without a declared footprint is not a receiver-relative result
   and MUST NOT be presented as one.

4.3.  Outcome Taxonomy

   Every opportunity MUST be classified into exactly one consumer
   outcome:

   *  complete-success: all MPDUs of the PPDU acknowledged;

   *  partial-success: a proper subset of an A-MPDU's MPDUs acknowledged
      (the Block Ack bitmap is recorded; the delivered and total MPDU
      counts are reported);

   *  decode-failure: no MPDU acknowledged and the witness establishes
      the receiver did not deliver the frame(s);

   *  indeterminate: the outcome cannot be established from the declared
      witness (for example, the ACK itself may have been lost).

   indeterminate opportunities MUST be counted and reported, not
   discarded.  Rate estimates MUST be accompanied by a sensitivity bound
   computed with indeterminate outcomes counted first as losses and then
   as successes.

   For rate computation, a partial-success PPDU contributes its lost
   MPDUs to the loss numerator only if per-MPDU overlap evidence is
   available; otherwise the experiment MUST declare, in the plan,
   whether partial successes are graded at PPDU or MPDU granularity, and
   report both counts.

4.4.  Witness Requirements

   The experiment MUST declare the outcome witness and MUST justify its
   independence from the transmitter's own sensing.  For each witness
   class:

   *  receiver-trace: the receiver's per-MPDU decode log.  Establishes
      the consumer outcome directly; establishes overlap only if the
      receiver also records PHY-level indications, which MUST then be
      described.





Bond                    Expires 24 February 2027                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      Receiver-Relative CCA Measurement        August 2026


   *  ack-evidence: ACK/Block Ack reception at the transmitter.
      Establishes success; on its own it CANNOT establish the cause of a
      failure and an experiment using it alone MUST classify unexplained
      failures as indeterminate or decode-failure without overlap
      attribution, never as interferer-overlap losses.

   *  iq-capture: a synchronized IQ recording at or adjacent to the
      receiver.  Establishes overlap; establishes the consumer outcome
      only in combination with a receiver trace or ACK evidence.

   *  compound: a declared combination (for example receiver-trace + iq-
      capture, the reference design of Appendix B).

   For any witness the report MUST include: the witness source and
   physical placement relative to the receiver; the overlap classifier
   and its version; the synchronization method between witness and
   transmitter timelines; and the measured or bounded timing error.  The
   witness classifier's detection performance MUST be checked by
   manipulation checks using injected calibration events (interferer
   transmissions at known times), and the measured detection and false-
   detection rates MUST be reported (Section 7).

4.5.  Rate Definition and Attribution

   The primary observable is:

   IOLR = N(CCA idle AND attempted AND loss AND witnessed overlap)
          / N(CCA idle AND attempted)

   per footprint element, access method, and interval.

   Overlap is not causation: capture effect can deliver a frame despite
   overlap, and a loss can coincide with overlap yet be caused by fading
   or rate mismatch.  An experiment MAY describe its IOLR as a _false-
   idle rate_ only when its design identifies causation, at minimum: (a)
   a controlled interferer whose transmission schedule is known and
   manipulable; (b) a link-sanity manipulation check showing the same
   link delivers at or above a declared success rate when the interferer
   is silenced; and (c) an overlap classifier validated per Section 4.4.
   Reports of designs not meeting these conditions MUST use the neutral
   term IOLR.










Bond                    Expires 24 February 2027                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      Receiver-Relative CCA Measurement        August 2026


4.6.  Registration-First Discipline

   To carry evidential weight, an experiment SHOULD commit, before the
   measurement is run and in an immutable, third-party-verifiable form:
   (a) the analysis plan including thresholds and estimators, (b) the
   manipulation checks and their bars, and (c) the handling of
   indeterminate outcomes.  Every outcome, including a negative result,
   SHOULD be retained and reported.  An experiment that adjusts
   thresholds after seeing results, or discards runs, MUST disclose
   this; such results do not carry the evidential weight this
   methodology is designed to confer.  The provenance fields of the CMR
   (Section 7) carry the plan URI, plan digest, commitment time, and
   result digest.

5.  Comparative Procedure: Basic Access versus RTS/CTS

   A claim that RTS/CTS access reduces the IOLR for a footprint relative
   to basic access MUST be produced by the following procedure.

5.1.  Treatment Assignment

   Basic and RTS/CTS access cannot be applied to the same opportunity,
   and channel conditions are correlated over time.  The experiment MUST
   therefore assign access method by randomized interleaving: either
   per-opportunity randomization or randomized blocks with a declared,
   pre-registered block length.  Alternating fixed schedules ("same
   footprint and interval") do NOT satisfy this requirement.

5.2.  Held-Constant Conditions

   Traffic generation rules, interferer generation rules, PHY
   configuration, and CCA configuration MUST be identical across
   treatments, and MUST be recorded in the report context (Section 7).

5.3.  Interferer Requirements

   If the interferer does not decode CTS and honor the NAV, RTS/CTS
   cannot causally reduce interference and the comparison is void by
   construction.  For the comparative claim the interferer MUST be a MAC
   participant: it MUST decode the receiver's CTS and defer per the NAV.
   A scheduled burst generator that ignores CTS MAY be used only for the
   single-arm IOLR measurement of Section 4, and this MUST be disclosed.

5.4.  Statistics

   The comparative estimand is the difference (or ratio) of the two
   IOLRs.  The experiment MUST:




Bond                    Expires 24 February 2027                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      Receiver-Relative CCA Measurement        August 2026


   *  compute a confidence interval for the difference or ratio
      directly, not merely separate intervals per arm;

   *  declare the clustering unit (RF run, interference burst, or time
      block) and use an interval method valid under that clustering --
      block bootstrap, run-level resampling, or cluster-robust variance.
      A Wilson interval on per-opportunity counts is acceptable ONLY
      with a demonstrated justification of independence, which bursty
      interference generally defeats;

   *  report the number of clusters and opportunities per arm;

   *  state how indeterminate outcomes were handled in the comparison,
      with the sensitivity bounds of Section 4.3;

   *  report the manipulation checks of Section 4 and, additionally, a
      check that the randomization produced comparable interferer
      exposure across arms.

6.  Active False-Alarm Procedure (Optional)

   When CCA reports busy, no frame is sent; whether the transmission
   _would have_ succeeded is a counterfactual that passive observation
   cannot establish.  Measuring the false-alarm (exposed-node) direction
   therefore requires an intervention: transmitting on a controlled
   subset of busy indications under conditions that bound the harm, or a
   disclosed counterfactual model.

   This procedure is OPTIONAL and is NOT required for conformance with
   Section 4 or Section 5.  An experiment implementing it MUST:
   randomize the override decision within declared safety bounds; grade
   outcomes with the same witness discipline as Section 4; report the
   override rate and its selection rule; and hold a regulatory posture
   appropriate to deliberate transmission during busy indications (a
   conducted, cabled environment is RECOMMENDED).  Reports MUST keep
   false-alarm estimates in fields distinct from IOLR fields, with their
   own denominators (Section 7); the two rates have different
   denominators and MUST NOT be pooled.

7.  CCA Measurement Report Information Model

   This section defines an information model: named fields, their
   semantics, and presence requirements.  It deliberately does not
   select an encoding (JSON, CBOR, YANG) or transport; interoperable
   exchange requires a future companion document binding this model to a
   concrete schema.  The example in Section 7.2 is illustrative pseudo-
   JSON, not a wire format.




Bond                    Expires 24 February 2027               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      Receiver-Relative CCA Measurement        August 2026


7.1.  Report Structure

   A CMR consists of the following groups.  Fields are REQUIRED unless
   marked optional.

   schema:  name (fixed: cca-measurement-report) and version (this
      model: 1).  A consumer MUST NOT interpret a report whose
      schema.version it does not implement.

   profile:  The measurement profile and its version.  This document
      defines profile cca-iolr/1 (Section 4), cca-comparative/1
      (Section 5), and cca-false-alarm/1 (Section 6).

   subject:  The measured entity: transmitter identifier and link
      (transmitter, receiver, BSS).  Identifiers SHOULD be stable
      pseudonyms (Section 10).

   producer:  The entity that produced the report, when distinct from
      the subject (for example an offline grader).  Distinguishing the
      measured subject from the report producer is REQUIRED whenever
      they differ.

   access-method:  basic or rts-cts; for profile cca-comparative/1, both
      arms appear with per-arm counts.

   consumer-scope:  The footprint: receiver identifier(s), TID(s) or
      access categories, the aggregation rule for any pooled figures,
      and the weighting (for example opportunity-weighted).

   witness:  Source (receiver-trace, ack-evidence, iq-capture,
      compound), placement relative to the receiver, synchronization
      method, measured timing-error bound, and for overlap classifiers:
      classifier identifier, version, and measured detection / false-
      detection rates from calibration events (Section 4.4).

   counts:  Per footprint element and access method: eligible, cca-idle,
      cca-busy, attempted, complete-success, partial-success (with
      delivered/total MPDU counts), overlap-loss, other-loss,
      indeterminate.  False-alarm profiles add override-attempted and
      its outcome counts under a distinct group, preserving the separate
      denominators.

   estimates:  For each reported rate: value, ci-low, ci-high, ci-level
      (for example 0.95), estimator (for example block-bootstrap),
      clustering-unit, assumptions (free text, REQUIRED), and the
      sensitivity bounds for indeterminate handling (Section 4.3).  For
      profile cca-comparative/1, the difference or ratio estimate with
      its own interval is REQUIRED.



Bond                    Expires 24 February 2027               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft      Receiver-Relative CCA Measurement        August 2026


   context:  Channel, bandwidth, PHY, MCS or rate-control setting,
      transmit powers, CCA thresholds (energy detect and preamble
      detect), retry limit, aggregation settings, topology reference
      (for a conducted bench: the attenuation network), and software/
      firmware versions of every measurement component.

   interval:  Measurement start and end times and the time source.

   max-age (optional):  A duration after which the producer advises the
      report no longer be treated as current.  (This replaces the -00
      field refresh-floor; a validity duration is advisory metadata, not
      a measured quantity.)

   provenance:  plan-uri (immutable URI of the registered plan), plan-
      digest (cryptographic digest of the plan), commit-time, and
      result-digest (digest of the raw result artifact).  A bare
      assertion of registration without these fields carries no weight
      and MUST NOT be emitted in their place.

   extensions (optional):  A container for implementation-specific
      members.  Consumers MUST ignore unrecognized members inside
      extensions and MUST NOT ignore unrecognized members elsewhere; a
      report with unrecognized members outside extensions is malformed
      under this model.

7.2.  Example (Illustrative Only)

   {
     "schema": { "name": "cca-measurement-report", "version": "1" },
     "profile": { "id": "cca-comparative", "version": "1" },
     "subject": { "tx": "sta-anon-12", "rx": "sta-anon-7",
                  "bss": "bss-anon-3" },
     "producer": { "id": "grader-bench-1" },
     "consumer-scope": { "receivers": ["sta-anon-7"],
                         "tids": [0, 5],
                         "aggregation": "per-tid",
                         "weighting": "opportunity-weighted" },
     "witness": { "source": "compound",
                  "components": ["receiver-trace", "iq-capture"],
                  "placement": "rx-port-conducted-tap",
                  "sync-method": "shared-10mhz-pps",
                  "timing-error-bound-us": 1.0,
                  "classifier": { "id": "overlap-xcorr", "version":
                    "0.3", "detection-rate": 0.98,
                    "false-detection-rate": 0.01 } },
     "counts": { "basic":   { "eligible": 24011, "cca-idle": 20110,
                   "cca-busy": 3901, "attempted": 20110,
                   "complete-success": 16221, "partial-success": 1120,



Bond                    Expires 24 February 2027               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft      Receiver-Relative CCA Measurement        August 2026


                   "overlap-loss": 2410, "other-loss": 201,
                   "indeterminate": 158 },
                 "rts-cts": { "eligible": 23987, "cca-idle": 20066,
                   "cca-busy": 3921, "attempted": 20066,
                   "complete-success": 18804, "partial-success": 704,
                   "overlap-loss": 322, "other-loss": 196,
                   "indeterminate": 40 } },
     "estimates": { "iolr-basic": { "value": 0.120, "ci-low": 0.101,
                      "ci-high": 0.141, "ci-level": 0.95,
                      "estimator": "block-bootstrap",
                      "clustering-unit": "interference-burst",
                      "assumptions": "bursty interferer; 412 bursts" },
                    "iolr-rts-cts": { "value": 0.016, "ci-low": 0.011,
                      "ci-high": 0.023, "ci-level": 0.95,
                      "estimator": "block-bootstrap",
                      "clustering-unit": "interference-burst",
                      "assumptions": "as above" },
                    "difference": { "value": 0.104, "ci-low": 0.083,
                      "ci-high": 0.125, "ci-level": 0.95,
                      "estimator": "block-bootstrap",
                      "clustering-unit": "interference-burst",
                      "assumptions": "paired within block" } },
     "context": { "channel": 6, "bandwidth-mhz": 20, "phy": "erp-ofdm",
                  "mcs": "12mbps", "tx-power-dbm": -30,
                  "cca-ed-dbm": -62, "cca-pd-dbm": -82,
                  "retry-limit": 4, "ampdu": false,
                  "topology": "conducted-triangle-rev2",
                  "versions": { "platform": "openwifi-x.y",
                                "grader": "cca-grader-0.4" } },
     "interval": { "start": "2026-09-01T18:00:00Z",
                   "end": "2026-09-01T19:00:00Z",
                   "time-source": "gps-pps" },
     "provenance": { "plan-uri":
         "https://example.org/prereg/PREREG-CCA-001/immutable",
         "plan-digest": "sha256:...", "commit-time":
         "2026-08-30T12:00:00Z", "result-digest": "sha256:..." }
   }

   All numeric values above are ILLUSTRATIVE.  This document defines how
   to measure and express such a report; it does not report a measured
   rate for any deployment, and no conformant experiment has yet been
   run (Section 8).

8.  Implementation Status

   (This section follows the spirit of [RFC7942] and is to be removed
   before any publication as an RFC.)




Bond                    Expires 24 February 2027               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft      Receiver-Relative CCA Measurement        August 2026


   No implementation of this methodology exists at the time of writing,
   and no conformant experiment has been run.  All numeric examples in
   this document are illustrative.

   Platform assessment for the reference experiment (Appendix B):

   *  gr-ieee802-11 (GNU Radio 802.11a/g/p transceiver) is NOT suitable
      for the comparative procedure: its upstream documentation states
      that it implements no CSMA/CA mechanism and that RTS/CTS does not
      work within its timing constraints.  It is therefore also unable
      to provide the logged per-opportunity CCA decisions this
      methodology requires of the device under test.

   *  OpenWiFi (FPGA-based SDR 802.11 stack) is the current candidate
      substrate: it exposes DCF/CSMA-CA in the FPGA, CCA threshold
      configuration, NAV handling, ACK generation, and IQ access.  It is
      a candidate, not a validated platform: its RTS/CTS behavior and
      per-opportunity CCA logging have not yet been demonstrated against
      the requirements of this document.

   *  The interferer for the comparative procedure must itself be a MAC
      participant (Section 5); a scheduled burst generator does not
      qualify.

9.  Relationship to IEEE 802.11

   IEEE 802.11 [IEEE802.11] is the normative authority for the PHY and
   MAC behavior discussed here, including CCA, the NAV, RTS/CTS, and
   channel access generally.  This document defines neither new on-air
   behavior nor new MAC frames.  It offers a measurement vocabulary, a
   measurement methodology, and a report information model, so that the
   receiver-relative error rate of unmodified 802.11 CCA can be measured
   and compared on a common basis.  Its intended contribution to IEEE
   work is that vocabulary and those measurements, not a MAC change.

10.  Security Considerations

   A CMR is measurement telemetry about a deployment; it is not a
   cryptographic certificate and carries no intrinsic authentication.
   The following considerations apply.

   Producer authentication and authorization:  A consumer acting on CMRs
      MUST be able to authenticate the producer and decide whether it is
      authorized to describe the claimed subject.  This document does
      not define the mechanism; deployments MUST protect CMRs with the
      authentication and integrity mechanisms of their telemetry
      transport, or detached signatures.




Bond                    Expires 24 February 2027               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft      Receiver-Relative CCA Measurement        August 2026


   Tampering, replay, and rollback:  An attacker who can modify, replay,
      or re-present old reports can misrepresent current conditions.
      The interval, provenance digests, and transport integrity together
      allow a consumer to detect stale or altered reports; consumers
      SHOULD reject reports older than max-age and SHOULD verify result-
      digest against the artifact when acting on a report.

   Clock manipulation:  Both the witness alignment (Section 4.4) and
      replay detection depend on time.  The time source MUST be
      reported; a consumer SHOULD treat reports with unverifiable
      synchronization claims as unwitnessed.

   Witness compromise:  The report's value rests on its witness.  A
      forged or misplaced witness (for example, a capture at the
      transmitter presented as receiver-adjacent) reintroduces the
      transmitter-relativity the method exists to remove.  Placement,
      classifier version, and calibration performance are REQUIRED
      fields for this reason; experiments SHOULD prefer witness
      components that an adversary in the measured environment cannot
      spoof.

   Linkability and privacy:  Per-TID footprints reveal which traffic
      classes a station carries and how well they are delivered.
      Subject and receiver identifiers SHOULD be stable pseudonyms
      scoped to the measurement context; footprint granularity SHOULD be
      minimized to what the experiment requires; and emitted reports
      SHOULD receive the deployment's normal telemetry confidentiality
      protections.

   Induced overhead:  Mechanisms that actuate on measured rates (for
      example enabling RTS/CTS more aggressively) consume airtime.
      Actuation is out of scope here, but a consumer that actuates on
      CMRs SHOULD bound the overhead an adversarially inflated rate
      could induce, and SHOULD weigh reports by their provenance
      (Section 4.6).

11.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

12.  References

12.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.



Bond                    Expires 24 February 2027               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft      Receiver-Relative CCA Measurement        August 2026


   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

12.2.  Informative References

   [BIANCHI]  Bianchi, G., "Performance Analysis of the IEEE 802.11
              Distributed Coordination Function", IEEE Journal on
              Selected Areas in Communications vol. 18, no. 3, pp.
              535-547, DOI 10.1109/49.840210, 2000,
              <https://doi.org/10.1109/49.840210>.

   [IEEE802.11]
              IEEE, "IEEE Standard for Information Technology--
              Telecommunications and Information Exchange between
              Systems--Local and Metropolitan Area Networks--Specific
              Requirements--Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control
              (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications", IEEE Std
              802.11-2024, 2024,
              <https://standards.ieee.org/ieee/802.11/7028/>.

   [MACA]     Karn, P., "MACA - A New Channel Access Method for Packet
              Radio", ARRL/CRRL Amateur Radio 9th Computer Networking
              Conference pp. 134-140, 1990.

   [MACAW]    Bharghavan, V., Demers, A., Shenker, S., and L. Zhang,
              "MACAW: A Media Access Protocol for Wireless LAN's", Proc.
              ACM SIGCOMM 1994 pp. 212-225, DOI 10.1145/190314.190334,
              1994, <https://doi.org/10.1145/190314.190334>.

   [OT]       Bond, A. H., "Observation Theory for Estimation and
              Control: Consumer-Induced Geometry as a Complement to
              Observability, Filtering, and Feedback", 2026,
              <https://github.com/ahb-sjsu/geometric-
              observation/blob/38c682571f8345a6bffe6a29699e4d307988609d/
              paper/ot-estimation-control.pdf>.

   [RFC7942]  Sheffer, Y. and A. Farrel, "Improving Awareness of Running
              Code: The Implementation Status Section", BCP 205,
              RFC 7942, DOI 10.17487/RFC7942, July 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7942>.

   [VACUITY]  Bond, A. H., "The Vacuity of 'Fresh': A Survey of
              Replication and Consistency Schemes through the Consumer-
              Relative Witnessed Certificate", 2026,
              <https://github.com/ahb-sjsu/geometric-
              observation/blob/e8edc78c9b1302b3787a069152a60b0e871a5239/
              docs/replication-vacuity-survey.md>.



Bond                    Expires 24 February 2027               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft      Receiver-Relative CCA Measurement        August 2026


Appendix A.  Candidate Future Measurement Profiles (Informative)

   Draft -00 of this document enumerated NAV expiry, rate selection,
   spatial reuse, and roaming triggers alongside CCA.  They are removed
   from the normative scope because they do not share CCA's event unit,
   witness availability, or validity model:

   *  NAV expiry: an expired NAV means the station has no currently
      known virtual-carrier-sense reservation, not that no reservation
      exists; grading it requires global on-air state that a single
      monitor does not establish.

   *  Rate selection: IEEE 802.11 defines rates, MCSs, and signaling,
      not a rate-selection algorithm; the "assertion" being graded is an
      implementation choice and differs per vendor.

   *  Spatial reuse: the reuse condition is more conditional than "will
      not harm the overlapping BSS", and the affected consumers are in
      another BSS, complicating both footprint and witness.

   *  Roaming triggers: policy is implementation- and deployment-
      specific, and the event unit (a roam decision) is rare and
      confounded.

   Each could become a measurement profile with its own event unit,
   witness, and validity analysis; none is defined here.

Appendix B.  Conducted Hidden-Node Experiment Sketch (Informative)

   The reference experiment is a conducted (cabled) hidden-node
   triangle: transmitter A, interferer C, receiver Rx, and a witness tap
   W at the Rx port.  Attenuators set the defining relationship -- A
   cannot sense C (A's CCA reads idle while C transmits) but C's signal
   reaches Rx at colliding level.  A conducted bench removes over-the-
   air regulatory exposure, makes the hidden relationship a set
   quantity, and is reproducible; over-the-air replication is external-
   validity work, not the first experiment.

   Requirements flowing from the normative sections: A and Rx must be a
   platform exposing per-opportunity CCA decisions and RTS/CTS operation
   (see Section 8 for the platform assessment); C must be a MAC
   participant that decodes CTS and honors the NAV for the comparative
   arm; W must be synchronized to the transmitter timeline with a
   reported timing-error bound, and its overlap classifier calibrated
   with injected events; treatment assignment must be randomized
   interleaving; and the plan, bars, and manipulation checks must be
   registered immutably before the run, with an unsealed feasibility
   shakedown first.  This experiment has not been run (Section 8).



Bond                    Expires 24 February 2027               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft      Receiver-Relative CCA Measurement        August 2026


Appendix C.  Changes from the Precursor Draft

   (To be removed before publication.)  This document replaces the
   never-submitted precursor draft-bond-ot80211-freshness-00, renamed to
   match its narrowed scope; the changes below are relative to that
   precursor.

   *  Narrowed normative scope to CCA measurement and the basic-access
      versus RTS/CTS comparison; NAV, rate selection, spatial reuse, and
      roaming moved to Appendix A with the reasons they are harder.

   *  Separated access method, CCA observation, consumer outcome, and
      outcome witness; retitled the document accordingly.

   *  Replaced "false-clear rate attributable to the condition" with the
      neutral interferer-overlap loss rate and an explicit attribution
      bar (Section 4.5); "CCA-alone" replaced by "basic access".

   *  Defined the atomic transmission opportunity, the outcome taxonomy
      including partial Block Ack and indeterminate outcomes, and their
      handling in estimates.

   *  Moved false-alarm measurement to a separate OPTIONAL active
      procedure with its own denominators; passive experiments are no
      longer required to report it.

   *  Replaced the "Freshness Certificate" format with the CCA
      Measurement Report information model: schema/versioning, subject/
      producer split, witness classifier and synchronization fields,
      full count vector with distinct denominators, estimator and
      clustering fields, context, max-age (was refresh-floor), and
      digest-based provenance; removed the claim of wire
      interoperability.

   *  Added the comparative-procedure statistics requirements
      (randomized interleaving, direct interval on the difference,
      declared clustering, indeterminate sensitivity bounds) and the
      MAC-participant interferer requirement.

   *  Added an Implementation Status section recording that no
      experiment has been run and that gr-ieee802-11 cannot support the
      required behavior; OpenWiFi is the unvalidated candidate.

   *  Rewrote Security Considerations (producer authentication,
      tampering/replay/rollback, clock manipulation, witness compromise,
      linkability, induced overhead).





Bond                    Expires 24 February 2027               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft      Receiver-Relative CCA Measurement        August 2026


   *  Updated the IEEE reference to Std 802.11-2024; fixed internal
      cross-references; removed the duplicated BCP 14 paragraph; "no
      IANA actions"; archival citations pinned (MACA, MACAW, BIANCHI
      publication data; [OT] title corrected; [VACUITY] pinned to an
      immutable commit).

Acknowledgements

   This work applies the consumer-relative, witnessed, calibrated
   framing of Observation Theory [OT] and the cross-substrate survey
   [VACUITY] to IEEE 802.11 channel access.  It takes the hidden- and
   exposed-node framing from the MACA/MACAW line of work [MACA] [MACAW]
   and the DCF analysis of [BIANCHI].  The -01 revision responds to a
   detailed technical review; the reviewer's separation of access
   method, observation, outcome, and witness now structures the
   measurement model.

Author's Address

   Andrew H. Bond
   San José State University
   Email: andrew.bond@sjsu.edu





























Bond                    Expires 24 February 2027               [Page 19]
